---
layout: post
title: Cirrhosis of the UCI Liver Data-set
tags: machine_learning gpbenchmarks
---

Cirrhosis of the UCI Liver Data-set
========

The
[BUPA Liver data-set](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Liver+Disorders),
donated in 1990 by Richard S.~Forsyth to the UCI Machine Learning
Repository, has been used as a classification benchmark in many
hundreds of machine learning papers. However, the large majority
*misinterpret* this dataset: they take the final variable as a
dependent variable indicating presence or absence of a liver
disease. They try to learn classifiers which predict its value based
on the other, independent variables. However, this is incorrect. The
final variable in the dataset is a "selector", intended to indicate a
train-test split. It does not indicate presence or absence of liver
disease, or any other biomedical property. Hence, results on this
dataset are meaningless.

Most existing papers which misinterpret the dataset in this way are
not greatly damaged by their misunderstanding, because they are simply
using it as one benchmark among many, and they are not making claims
about clinical practice. Nevertheless, it's interesting to see the
range of venues where the error has occurred, including: Pattern
Recognition Letters, ICML, and NIPS.

However, a *few* authors have interpreted their results as saying
something about the diagnosis and treatment of liver disorders. Such
claims appear in biomedical-oriented publication venues such as:
Journal of Medical Systems, and Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine. They are significantly damaged by their
misinterpretation.

Richard Forsyth (involved in the original work on the dataset) and I
wrote a short letter to *Pattern Recognition Letters* to point this
problem out,
[published here](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167865516000088).

We've been contacting various sites where the incorrect interpretation
is repeated, including UCI itself, openml.org, and some R packages.

(EDIT 8 June 2016: since publishing the letter, we've found another instance of the misunderstanding, and this is worth mentioning because it is a well-known article by one of the biggest names in statistical machine learning: [Breiman's *Two Cultures* article](http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.ss/1009213726).)
